# Caribou-Biosciences/nf-SITE-Seq: Output

## Introduction

This document describes the output produced by the pipeline. The steps of the pipeline and their outputs are listed chronologically, however, the outputs that are most important for the interpretation of results are the [SITE-Seq® assay report](#site-seq-assay-report), the [aggregated site call TSVs](#aggregate-sites), the [individual concentration site call TSVs](#report--call-sites), and the [processing metrics TSV](#collate-stats). See also [this page that goes into depth about the SITE-Seq® assay report](./site-seq_assay_report.md).

The directories listed below will be created in the results directory after the pipeline has finished. All paths are relative to the top-level results directory.

## Pipeline overview

The pipeline is built using [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) and processes data using the following steps:

- [Read preprocessing](#read-preprocessing)
  - [FastP](#fastp) - Raw read QC
  - [Quality-filter UMIs](#quality-filter-umis) - Filter reads by the quality scores of their UMI bases
  - [UMI-tools extract](#umi-tools-extract) - Extract UMI sequences from read 2
- [Alignment and deduplication](#alignment-and-deduplication)
  - [Bowtie2](#bowtie2) - Align reads to the reference genome
  - [UMI-tools dedup](#umi-tools-dedup) - Deduplicate alignments based on their UMIs and alignment positions
- [Signal analysis and site calling](#signal-analysis-and-site-calling)
  - [Count read starts](#count-read-starts) - Count the number of reads that align to each position in the genome
  - [Merge read starts](#merge-read-starts) - Merge the distributions of read starts from multiple replicates
  - [Calculate raw signal](#calculate-raw-signal) - Calculate the raw signal statistic with no control correction
  - [Calculate background signal](#calculate-background-signal) - Calculate raw background signal in the control samples
  - [Calculate corrected signal](#calculate-corrected-signal) - Calculate the signal statistic which is corrected by observations in the control samples
  - [TSV to bigWig](#tsv-to-bigwig) - Convert corrected signal distribution TSVs into bigWig format
  - [Identify signal peaks](#identify-signal-peaks) - Identify peaks of the corrected signal statistic
  - [Report & call sites](#report--call-sites) - Determine which sites pass the reporting and site-calling criteria and output them into a TSV
  - [Aggregate sites](#aggregate-sites) - Aggregate reported sites across multiple RNP concentrations and output them into a TSV
- [Reporting](#reporting)
  - [Collate stats](#collate-stats) - Extract various per-sample statistics/metrics and combine them into a single TSV
  - [IGV session](#igv-session) - Create an IGV session file for each sample group in the input
  - [SITE-Seq® assay report](#site-seq-assay-report) - Create an HTML report summarizing the results for each sample group in the input
  - [MultiQC](#multiqc) - Aggregate report describing results and QC from the whole pipeline
- [Other results](#other-results)
  - [Reference genome files](#reference-genome-files)
  - [Pipeline information](#pipeline-information) - Report metrics generated during the workflow execution

## Read preprocessing

### FastP

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `fastp/`
  - `*.fastp.html`: FastP report containing quality metrics in HTMl format.
  - `*.fastp.json`: FastP report containing quality metrics in JSON format.
  - `*.fastp.log`: FastP execution log.

</details>

[FastP](https://github.com/OpenGene/fastp) gives general quality metrics about your sequenced reads and performs filtering on the basis of quality and read length.

### Quality-filter UMIs

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `qfilterumis/`
  - `*.umi-filter-report.json`: A report in JSON format summarizing how many reads passed/failed the UMI base quality filtering criteria.

</details>

This step uses a custom script to filter out reads with low quality UMI bases. Reads with more than `--max_lowq_umi_bases` bases with a quality score below `--umi_base_qual_thresh` are filtered out.

### UMI-tools extract

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `umitools/`
  - `*.umi_extract.log`: Log file generated by the UMI-tools extract command.

</details>

[UMI-tools](https://umi-tools.readthedocs.io) deduplicates reads based on unique molecular identifiers (UMIs) to address PCR-bias. The UMI-tools extract command removes the UMI barcode information from the read sequence and adds it to the read name.

## Alignment and deduplication

### Bowtie2

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `bams/`
  - `*.bam`: BAM file containing read alignments to the reference genome.
- `bowtie2/`
  - `*.bowtie2.log`: Log file generated by the Bowtie2 align command.

</details>

[Bowtie2](https://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/bowtie2/manual.shtml) aligns reads to the reference genome.

### UMI-tools dedup

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `bams/`
  - `*.dedup.bam`: BAM file containing deduplicated read alignments to the reference genome.
- `umitools/`
  - `*_edit_distance.tsv`: Reports the (binned) average edit distance between the UMIs at each position.
  - `*_per_umi.tsv`: UMI-level summary statistics.
  - `*_per_umi_per_position.tsv`: Tabulates the counts for unique combinations of UMI and position.
  - `*.umi_dedup.log`: Log file generated by the UMI-tools dedup command.

The content of the files above is explained in more detail in the [UMI-tools documentation](https://umi-tools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/dedup.html#dedup-specific-options).

</details>

After extracting the UMI information from the read sequence (see [UMI-tools extract](#umi-tools-extract)), the second step in the handling of UMIs involves deduplicating the reads based on both mapping and UMI barcode information.

## Signal analysis and site calling

### Count read starts

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `dist_tsvs/`
  - `*.read_starts.tsv.gz`: A [distribution TSV](#distribution-tsv) containing the number of reads that started from each position in the genome.
- `countreadstarts/`
  - `*.stats.json`: A report in JSON format summarizing the number of input and output reads as well as how many reads failed filtering criteria.

</details>

After alignment to the reference genome, the BAM file for each sample is processed in order to count the number of reads that originated from each position in the genome. Under default parameters, read counts are normalized per-million events observed; this can be disabled with `--apply_normalization false`. Filtering is performed in order to ignore alignments that may have negative affects on site calling; this includes skipping alignments with a mapping quality below `--min_map_qual`, skipping alignments with alignment clipping at the start of the read above `--max_clipping`, and skipping alignments with a reference length below `--min_aln_length`.

### Merge read starts

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `dist_tsvs/`
  - `*.merged_starts.tsv.gz`: A [distribution TSV](#distribution-tsv) containing the number of reads that started from each position in the genome for all replicates of a particular sample group and RNP concentration.

</details>

Read start counts are merged across replicates to create a single file for all replicates of the same sample group and RNP concentration.

### Calculate raw signal

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `dist_tsvs/`
  - `*.window_sums.W5.tsv.gz`: A [distribution TSV](#distribution-tsv) containing the value of the raw signal statistic at each position in the genome for all replicates of a particular sample group and RNP concentration. The `5` in the file name corresponds to the value of the `--stat_window` parameter.
- `calculatewindowsums/`
  - `*.window_sums.W5.dist.tsv`: A TSV file summarizing the distribution of the raw signal statistic, i.e. how many times each unique statistic value was observed across the genome. The `5` in the file name corresponds to the value of the `--stat_window` parameter.

</details>

Read start counts are analyzed in order to calculate a raw signal statistic that does not account for signal in the control. This statistic is a simple sliding window sum of the read start counts for each replicate. The size of the sliding window is controlled with the `--stat_window` parameter.

### Calculate background signal

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `dist_tsvs/`
  - `*.window_sums.W150.tsv.gz`: A [distribution TSV](#distribution-tsv) containing the value of the background signal statistic at each position in the genome for all replicates of each control sample group. The `150` in the file name corresponds to the value of the `--control_noise_window` parameter.
- `calculatewindowsums/`
  - `*.window_sums.W150.dist.tsv`: A TSV file summarizing the distribution of the background signal statistic, i.e. how many times each unique statistic value was observed across the genome. The `150` in the file name corresponds to the value of the `--control_noise_window` parameter.

</details>

Read start counts in the control samples are analyzed in order to calculate a signal statistic representing the amount of background signal. This statistic is a simple sliding window sum of the read start counts for each control replicate, this time using a wider window. The size of the sliding window is controlled with the `--control_noise_window` parameter.

### Calculate corrected signal

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `dist_tsvs/`
  - `*.window_diffs.W5.tsv.gz`: A [distribution TSV](#distribution-tsv) containing the value of the signal statistic at each position in the genome for all replicates of a particular sample group and RNP concentration. The `5` in the file name corresponds to the value of the `--stat_window` parameter.

</details>

Read start counts for paired sets of test and control samples are analyzed in order to calculate the core signal statistic of the SITE-Seq® assay algorithm. This statistic is a sliding window sum that corrects for observations in the control samples. The size of the sliding window is controlled with the `--stat_window` parameter. In addition to the test vs control comparison, a control vs control comparison is performed in order to generate a null distribution of the signal statistic that is used to determine how significant test signals are. [See this section of the algorithm description for more details](./algorithm.md#calculate-corrected-signal)

### TSV to bigWig

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `bigwigs/`
  - `*.bw`: A bigWig file containing the distribution of the signal statistic for each test sample. These files allow the signal statistic distribution to be visualized in IGV.

</details>

The [distribution TSVs](#distribution-tsv) containing the signal statistic distributions are converted into [bigWig](https://genome.ucsc.edu/goldenpath/help/bigWig.html) format. This allows the distributions to be visualized in IGV.

### Identify signal peaks

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `dist_tsvs/`
  - `*.peaks.tsv.gz`: A [distribution TSV](#distribution-tsv) containing the value of the background signal statistic at each peak in the genome for all replicates of a particular sample group and RNP concentration.
- `extractwindowedpeaks/`
  - `*.peaks.dist.tsv`: A TSV file summarizing the distribution of the peak signal statistic values, i.e. how many times each unique peak statistic value was observed across the genome.

</details>

The distributions of signal statistics are processed in order to identify signal peaks. Each peak will subsequently be considered for site calling.

### Report & call sites

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `site_tsvs/`
  - `*.reported_sites.tsv`: A TSV file containing the sites that passed the reporting criteria. Some, none, or all of these sites may have also passed the site calling criteria. See below for a description of each column:
    - **rank**: The rank of the site. If included, the on-target site will have a rank of 0 by definition.
    - **chrom**: The name of the chromosome the site is on.
    - **position**: The 0-based position on the chromosome of the site.
    - **position_1b**: The 1-based position on the chromosome of the site.
    - **closest_motif**: The closest-matching sequence to the on-target motif within close proximity of the site. Uppercase bases match the on-target motif; lowercase bases do not match the on-target motif; dashes represent gaps relative to the on-target motif.
    - **motif_location**: The genomic coordinates of the closest-matching sequence.
    - **motif_score**: The alignment score of the closest-matching sequence.
    - **num_subs**: The number of substitutions, i.e. mismatched bases, between the closest-matching sequence and the on-target motif.
    - **num_gaps**: The number of gaps between the closest-matching sequence and the on-target motif.
    - **site_called**: Whether the site passed the site calling criteria.
    - **digested**: Whether this site was "digested", i.e. passed the statistical test evaluating whether the signal statistics exceeded the site calling threshold.
    - **high_background**: Whether this site was determined to be in a high-background region as determined by raw signal strength in the control replicates.
    - **test_pval**: The test p-value of this site.
    - **background_pval**: The p-value of the high-background statistical test.
    - **total_signal**: The sum of signal values across all replicates.
    - **mean_signal**: The mean value of the signal statistic across all replicates.
    - **signal_vals**: The signal statistic of each replicate.
    - **total_test_reads**: The total number of reads counted at this site across all replicates for this site. If UMIs are enabled (true by default), this represents the total number of deduplicated reads. If normalization is enabled (true by default), this number is normalized per-million reads analyzed.
    - **total_control_reads**: The number of reads counted at this site in each control replicate. If UMIs are enabled (true by default), these represent the number of deduplicated reads. If normalization is enabled (true by default), each number is normalized per-million reads analyzed.
    - **test_read_vals**: The number of reads counted at this site in each replicate. If UMIs are enabled (true by default), these represent the number of deduplicated reads. If normalization is enabled (true by default), each number is normalized per-million reads analyzed.
    - **control_read_vals**: The number of reads counted at this site in each control replicate. If UMIs are enabled (true by default), these represent the number of deduplicated reads. If normalization is enabled (true by default), each number is normalized per-million reads analyzed.
    - **total_wide_control_reads**: The number of reads counted within a wide window of this site in each control replicate. These values are used to determine whether this site is in a high-background region. If UMIs are enabled (true by default), these represent the number of deduplicated reads. If normalization is enabled (true by default), each number is normalized per-million reads analyzed.
    - **mean_wide_control_reads**: The mean number of reads counted within a wide window of this site across control replicates. This value is used to determine whether this site is in a high-background region. If UMIs are enabled (true by default), this represents the number of deduplicated reads. If normalization is enabled (true by default), this number is normalized per-million reads analyzed.
    - **wide_control_read_vals**: The number of reads counted within a wide window of this site in each control replicate. These values are used to determine whether this site is in a high-background region. If UMIs are enabled (true by default), these represent the number of deduplicated reads. If normalization is enabled (true by default), each number is normalized per-million reads analyzed.
    - **pct_max_peak_vals**: This site's signal calculated as a percentage of the maximum signal for each replicate.
    - **mean_pct_max_peak**: The mean of the percentage of maximum peak of this site across all replicates.

</details>

For each test sample group and RNP concentration, multiple signal statistics are analyzed from both test and control samples in order to determine which signal peaks in the test samples pass the site reporting and calling criteria. For sites that pass the reporting criteria, the sequence with the most similarity to the on-target motif is identified and included in the output. [See this section of the algorithm description for more details on site reporting/calling](./algorithm.md#report-and-call-sites)

### Aggregate sites

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `site_tsvs/`
  - `*.aggregated_sites.tsv`: A TSV file containing aggregated sites across all RNP concentrations for a particular sample group. See below for a description of each column:
    - **rank**: The rank of the site. If included, the on-target site will have a rank of 0 by definition.
    - **chrom**: The name of the chromosome the site is on.
    - **position**: The 0-based position on the chromosome of the site.
    - **position_1b**: The 1-based position on the chromosome of the site.
    - **closest_motif**: The closest-matching sequence to the on-target motif within close proximity of the site. Uppercase bases match the on-target motif; lowercase bases do not match the on-target motif; dashes represent gaps relative to the on-target motif.
    - **motif_location**: The genomic coordinates of the closest-matching sequence.
    - **motif_score**: The alignment score of the closest-matching sequence.
    - **num_subs**: The number of substitutions, i.e. mismatched bases, between the closest-matching sequence and the on-target motif.
    - **num_gaps**: The number of gaps between the closest-matching sequence and the on-target motif.
    - **total_signal**: The total signal summed across all replicates of all RNP concentrations.
    - **XnM_site_called**: Whether the site was called at "X" nM RNP concentration. There will be one of these columns per RNP concentration tested.
    - **XnM_test_pval**: The test p-value of this site at "X" nM RNP concentration. There will be one of these columns per RNP concentration tested.
    - **background_pval**: The p-value of the high-background statistical test.
    - **XnM_mean_pct_max_peak**: The mean of the percentage of maximum peak of this site across all replicates at X nM RNP concentration. There will be one of these columns per RNP concentration tested.
    - **XnM_pct_max_peak_vals**: This site's signal calculated as a percentage of the maximum signal for each replicate at X nM RNP concentration. There will be one of these columns per RNP concentration tested.
    - **XnM_mean_signal**: The mean value of the signal statistic across all replicates at X nM RNP concentration for this site. There will be one of these columns per RNP concentration tested.
    - **XnM_signal_vals**: The signal statistic of each replicate at X nM RNP concentration for this site. There will be one of these columns per RNP concentration tested.
    - **XnM_total_test_reads**: The total number of reads counted at this site across all replicates at X nM RNP concentration for this site. If UMIs are enabled (true by default), this represents the total number of deduplicated reads. If normalization is enabled (true by default), this number is normalized per-million reads analyzed in this sample. There will be one of these columns per RNP concentration tested.
    - **total_control_reads**: The number of reads counted at this site in each control replicate. If UMIs are enabled (true by default), these represent the number of deduplicated reads. If normalization is enabled (true by default), each number is normalized per-million reads analyzed in that sample.
    - **total_wide_control_reads**: The number of reads counted within a wide window of this site in each control replicate. These values are used to determine whether this site is in a high-background region. If UMIs are enabled (true by default), these represent the number of deduplicated reads. If normalization is enabled (true by default), each number is normalized per-million reads analyzed in that sample.
    - **mean_wide_control_reads**: The mean number of reads counted within a wide window of this site across control replicates. This value is used to determine whether this site is in a high-background region. If UMIs are enabled (true by default), this represents the number of deduplicated reads. If normalization is enabled (true by default), this number is normalized per-million reads analyzed.
    - **XnM_test_read_vals**: The number of reads counted at this site in each replicate at X nM RNP concentration for this site. If UMIs are enabled (true by default), these represent the number of deduplicated reads. If normalization is enabled (true by default), each number is normalized per-million reads analyzed in that sample. There will be one of these columns per RNP concentration tested.
    - **control_read_vals**: The number of reads counted at this site in each control replicate. If UMIs are enabled (true by default), these represent the number of deduplicated reads. If normalization is enabled (true by default), each number is normalized per-million reads analyzed in that sample.
    - **wide_control_read_vals**: The number of reads counted within a wide window of this site in each control replicate. These values are used to determine whether this site is in a high-background region. If UMIs are enabled (true by default), these represent the number of deduplicated reads. If normalization is enabled (true by default), each number is normalized per-million reads analyzed in that sample.
    - **XnM_total_signal**: The sum of signal values across all replicates at X nM RNP concentration for this site. There will be one of these columns per RNP concentration tested.
    - **XnM_digested**: Whether this site was "digested", i.e. passed the statistical test evaluating whether the signal statistics exceeded the site calling threshold, at X nM RNP concentration. There will be one of these columns per RNP concentration tested.
    - **high_background**: Whether this site was determined to be in a high-background region as determined by raw signal strength in the control replicates.

</details>

[Reported sites](#report--call-sites) are aggregated to create a unified set of sites reported across all RNP concentrations for a particular sample group. A site may have slightly different coordinates across different RNP concentrations, or may be missing entirely from a given RNP concentration, so this step picks a consensus location for each site and recomputes statistic values to ensure they are accurate at the consensus position across all RNP concentrations. [See this section of the algorithm description for more details](./algorithm.md#aggregate-sites).

## Reporting

### Collate stats

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `reports/`
  - `all_processing_metrics.tsv`: A TSV file containing read, UMI, and alignment metrics for all samples in the run. See below for a description of each column:
    - **identifier**: The identifier for the sample. Incorporates the sample group, RNP concentration, and replicate number.
    - **sample_group**: The sample group of the sample.
    - **replicate**: The replicate of the sample.
    - **concentration**: The RNP concentration of the sample.
    - **total_reads**: The total number of reads in the input for this sample.
    - **lowq_reads**: The number of reads filtered from the input due to being low-quality.
    - **too_many_n_reads**: The number of reads filtered from the input due to containing too many "N" base calls.
    - **short_reads**: The number of reads filtered from the input due to being too short.
    - **lowq_umis**: The number of reads filtered from the input due to having low-quality UMI bases.
    - **reads_passing_filter**: The number of input reads that passed filtering criteria.
    - **pct_reads_passing_filter**: The percentage of input reads that passed filtering criteria.
    - **pct_q30_reads_pf**: The percentage of bases with a quality score ≥30 among input reads passing the filtering criteria.
    - **aligned_reads**: The number of reads that aligned to the reference genome.
    - **pct_aligned**: The percentage of reads that aligned to the reference genome. Calculated as a percentage of the reads passing filtering criteria.
    - **total_dedup_umis**: The number of unique alignments after deduplication.
    - **pct_duplication**: The percentage of alignments that were duplicates.
    - **clipped_alignments**: The number of alignments that were filtered out due to clipping at the start of the read.
    - **low_mapq_alignments**: The number of alignments that were filtered out due to a low mapping quality.
    - **alignments_pf**: The number of alignments passing the filtering criteria.
    - **total_unique_sites**: The number of genomic locations that had at least one alignment originating from that position.

</details>

Various logs and reports are parsed to create a single TSV containing read, UMI, and alignment metrics for all samples in the run.

### IGV session

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `igv/`
  - `*_igv_session.xml`: An IGV session file containing BAMs and bigWig tracks for every sample in a particular sample group.

</details>

To facilitate the manual inspection of sites, an [IGV](https://igv.org/) session file (XML format) is created for every sample group in the input. This file can be loaded into IGV which will automatically load various data tracks (described below). Under default parameters, data paths in the session file will be absolute paths on the output file system. If relative paths are preferred, use the `--use_relative_igv_paths` parameter—data paths will then be relative to the location of the session file which allows the IGV session to still be functional if the entire output folder is copied to another machine. If you have a server that serves files in your output folder, you can make data paths URLs using the `--file_server_url` and `--file_server_prefixes` pipeline parameters. The tracks included are:

- One [bigWig](#tsv-to-bigwig) track per test replicate containing the signal statistic values for that sample.
- One BAM track per test and control replicate containing the alignments for that sample. If UMIs are enabled (true by default), these BAMs are post-deduplication.

### SITE-Seq® assay report

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `reports/`
  - `*_report.html`: This is the core output of the SITE-Seq® assay pipeline—an HTML file summarizing and visualizing the key outputs for a particular target. One report is created for each sample_group in the input samplesheet which collates results across all RNP concentrations and replicates in that sample group. [See this page for a detailed breakdown of this report](site-seq_assay_report.md).

</details>

For each sample group in the input, an HTML report is created summarizing key outputs including sample metadata, a site-calling breakdown, a signal threshold breakdown, and a table of reported sites. This report is the core output of the SITE-Seq® assay analysis pipeline and is the best place to start when evaluating site detection performance. [The report is explained in detail on this page](site-seq_assay_report.md).

### MultiQC

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `multiqc/`
  - `multiqc_report.html`: a standalone HTML file that can be viewed in your web browser.
  - `multiqc_data/`: directory containing parsed statistics from the different tools used in the pipeline.
  - `multiqc_plots/`: directory containing static images from the report in various formats.

</details>

[MultiQC](http://multiqc.info) is a visualization tool that generates a single HTML report summarising all samples in your project. Most of the pipeline QC results are visualised in the report and further statistics are available in the report data directory.

Results generated by MultiQC collate pipeline QC from supported tools e.g. FastP. The pipeline has special steps which also allow the software versions to be reported in the MultiQC output for future traceability. For more information about how to use MultiQC reports, see <http://multiqc.info>.

## Other results

### Reference genome files

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `fasta/`
  - `*.<fasta|fa|fna>`: The genome FASTA file provided using the `--fasta` pipeline parameter.
  - `*.fai`: A fai index file of the genome FASTA.
- `bowtie2_index/`: Directory containing the Bowtie2 index built during the pipeline execution, if and only if `--save_bowtie2_index` is provided and `--bowtie2_index` is not provided.

</details>

The pipeline outputs files related to the reference genome used.

### Pipeline information

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `pipeline_info/`
  - Reports generated by Nextflow: `execution_report.html`, `execution_timeline.html`, `execution_trace.txt` and `pipeline_dag.dot`/`pipeline_dag.svg`.
  - Reformatted samplesheet files used as input to the pipeline: `samplesheet.valid.csv`.
  - Parameters used by the pipeline run: `params.json`.

</details>

[Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/tracing.html) provides excellent functionality for generating various reports relevant to the running and execution of the pipeline. This will allow you to troubleshoot errors with the running of the pipeline, and also provide you with other information such as launch commands, run times and resource usage.

## Custom file formats

### Distribution TSV

The SITE-Seq® analysis pipeline uses a custom file format to store the distribution of different statistics across the genome on a per-position basis. The file format is a TSV with `chromosome`, `start`, and `end` columns that store a genomic coordinate range plus one or more columns that store data values. The file starts with a header row (prefixed with a `#`) that names each column. Only genomic coordinates with a non-empty value are stored in the file in order to save space. Records are sorted by coordinate and bgzip-compressed and are usually indexed using [Tabix](https://www.htslib.org/doc/tabix.html) which allows for efficient random access. This file format is very similar to the [BedGraph format](https://genome.ucsc.edu/goldenpath/help/bedgraph.html) except that it allows for multiple data value columns.
